Our intention in this series of podcasts, stories and some oral histories is to help you understand something about the culture, the nature, the community, the village that was Tiger Bay, Butetown.
And the people who made Cardiff docks what it was at its height, the people who made Cardiff successful because their sweat, their sacrifice actually drove the economy.
Now we want to say thank you here at HDA, we want to say thank you to Heritage Lottery for their support with this project. It's been greatly appreciated.
This brief story, let's say, is about Cardiff Coal Exchange, that big elegant building that you may have passed as you travelled through what is now Cardiff Bay down Bute Street.
The story of Cardiff's development from small fishing village, Market Town, of approximately 10,000 people to the largest and busiest coal exporting dock in the country is in theory well known.
That development reached its height in the closing decades of the 19th century when the black gold of the Rhondda Valley became one of the most prized and valuable commodities in the world.
Trainloads of coal poured in a never ceasing stream down the valleys into Cardiff and that was where most of the deals were carried out. A shipment brought into Cardiff, tons of coal ordered there. Fortunes were made and lost every single day.
As I said, Cardiff developed from a market town into a central hub of commerce in the world stage. Unfortunately in the early years of town's prosperity there was no central point where all of the various negotiations could take place.
Merchants simply chalked up the price they were offering or willing to pay on boards outside their offices and businessmen met in the quiet corners of public houses and taverns to fix prices and buy and sell the coal that was rapidly making Cardiff the greatest trading port ever seen.
It was a situation that was impractical and could not last. In an attempt to provide a formal centre for the coal trade, Cardiff Coal Exchange was designed.
The company behind the Coal Exchange, the Cardiff Exchange and Office Co Ltd, arranged for the building to be erected which it was between 1883 and 1886. The company was founded by Frederick de Corsi Hamilton, a local solicitor who played a formative role in Cardiff's development.
Another of his companies built Duke Street Arcade and High Street Arcade.
So they arranged for Cardiff Coal Exchange to be built. It was situated in Mount Stewart Square. It was originally a quiet residential square complete with a central garden. The design was by the architects James Seward and Thomas and the building was formally opened on 1st February 1886.
The architect, Edwin Seward, trained in Yeoville and came to Cardiff as an assistant to G.E. Robinson. By 1875 he was a member of the firm, James Seward and Thomas, that went on to build some of Cardiff's most notable public buildings in the late 19th century.
These included the Free Library in the Hayes, 1880-82, the Coal and Shipping Exchange in Mount Stewart Square and a couple of shopping arcades in the city centre.
Edwin Seward played a major role in pushing forward the extensive programme of public building that made Cardiff a world-class capital city. He became one of its most prominent spokesmen. He was the Honourable Secretary of the Cardiff Fine Art and Industrial Exhibition in 1881.
His name cropped up repeatedly in reports of proceedings of societies like the Cardiff South Wales and Montmacher Architect Society, the Cardiff Naturalist Society, the South Wales Art Society and Sketching Club, the Royal Cambrian Academy, the Camera Club and so on.
He also proposed and supported a National Institute for Wales in 1887 to celebrate the Queen's Jubilee and was one of the adjudicators at the National Iced Ed for 1889.
With the building of the Cardiff Coal Exchange, at last Cardiff businessmen had a place to go each day. It was estimated that as many as 8 or 9,000 people passed through the Coal Exchange each day,
with the hours between noon and 1 being the biggest trading period. The Coal Exchange was where the leading businessmen of South Wales area, the ship owners, the shipping agents, mine owners, met to fix deals, to buy and sell coal and of course to make themselves fortune.
The Coal Exchange was also the place where in 1901 the first ever one million pound deal was struck, equivalent to over a hundred million in today's money.
In the closing years of the 19th century it was where every businessman with pretensions of grandeur and success needed to be seen.
It was built and opened in stages. The Central Trading Hall and East Block completed first.
The Trading Hall was a large central place around which suites of offices were located. The London and Provincial Banking Company occupied the majority of the North Side.
On one ordinary day, 15 August 1908, Addison and Dahl dispatched 1,300 tonnes of coal from Cardiff to Ghent in Belgium.
Other shipments brokered at the exchange that day included 5,500 tonnes of coal from Ferndale in Rhondda to Genoa in Italy, 4,500 tonnes to Port Said in Egypt and 2,500 tonnes to Portsmouth for the Royal Navy.
Cardiff's reliance on coal made the Bute Docks highly vulnerable to any downturn and the demand for it.
With the end of the Second World War the Docks went into further decline.
The coal exchange closed in 1958 and coal exports came to an end in 1964.
The southern extension of the coal exchange was demolished in the 1970s and the building became Grade II listed in 1975.
In 1979 the coal exchange was earmarked as a future home of the proposed Welsh Assembly and a heavily reinforced underground car park was constructed, also envisaged to act as a nuclear shelter.
But the plan for devolution was rejected by the Welsh people in a referendum.
In 1983 the building was considered as a headquarters for the Welsh language station S4C although this also failed to take off.
In 1988 the building was reacquired and subsequently completely refurbished.
In 2001 it was turned into a major venue, a music venue which hosted acts such as the Arctic Monkeys, Manic Streak Preachers, Ocean Colour Scenes, Stereophorex, Van Morrison and Biffy Clyro.
The coal exchange closed on 7 August 2013 as a result of building safety issues with the subsequent liquidation of the company which owned it in 2014.
Ownership of the coal exchange then passed to the Crown Estate.
Following a series of proposals to demolish the building Cardiff Council purchased the coal exchange.
In 2016 the property was sold to the Liverpool based hospitality company Signature Living which began a program of restoration and conversion of the building into a hotel.
During the Covid pandemic the Liverpool based company Signature Living entered administration leaving the future of the building in limbo.
During the summer of 2020 the coal exchange hotel was saved by Cardiff based company Eden Grove Properties.
The company saved 56 jobs and reopened the hotel during September 2020 with no affiliation to the former owners Signature Living.
But after just two weeks the hotel was forced to close again in line with the fire break lockdown in Wales to stop the spread of Covid-19.
The building itself is constructed largely in limestone in a French Renaissance style.
The exterior is made of pale caution stone on three sides with yellow brick on the western elevation.
The roof is slate topped with multiple chimneys mainly in yellow brick.
Its style was derived from French Renaissance models.
The main entrance front faces south.
The building is made up of three stories and basements plus attic stories in the central pedimented frontispiece with a hipped pavilion roof.
The entrance is guarded by a pair of fluted Corinthian columns and topped by a floral leaf in a triangular pediment surmounted by royal arms.
On the northeast corner steps leading up to a projecting porch which housed Barclays Banks, resident here since the building opened.
The interior retains an entrance hall with a Jacobean style moulded plaster ceiling, panelling walls, a wood block and in-lane floor.
At the rear are two lions on high plinths supporting clock faces showing times of Cardiff high tides.
The central coal and shipping hall dominates the building surrounded by gallery tiers.
In Jacobean style dark wood, a false ceiling has reduced the height to two stories hiding a centrally glazed roof.
Now the Coal Exchange is undoubtedly a beautiful building.
But it was also a critically important building in every way during the heyday of Cardiff Docks.
The money that went through the Coal Exchange, which was when all said and done about the product, black gold, coal,
the working class people from the valleys, not just the Rhondda Valley, but the working class people from the valleys dug out of the tunnels underneath the mountains of Wales.
And if we are being exact, died young because of it, many of them.
That coal made it possible for the Cardiff Docks to be the most successful docks in the world, an honour that then passed to Burry Dock.
And the people of Tiger Bay, the merchant seamen from all over Britain and all over the world, the families,
they added to that working class sweat that came down from the valleys and effectively turned it into the gold that generated Cardiff and took it from 10,000 people market town and fishing village into the capital of Wales.
When the coal started coming down and when the first canal was built, which we'll come to, Merthyr was bigger than Cardiff.
Now we'll see what happens to the Coal Exchange as time goes on.
When you walk past it, just remember economically it was critical and it's very splendid.
It just tells you how important that stretch, that mile or so was the development of Cardiff.
And therefore how important that village was. And it was still a village when it made Cardiff, but it was a village of merchant seamens, workers, families and many of which still reside in Bute Town.